# Building an agile team

There are many challenges in building an agile team. We hear about self
organising teams but how can a CTO ensure a roadmap is kept? We hear about
\#noestimates but how can we plan anything without estimates? Failure is an
important part of agile but how can we accept failure in production?
Communication is key so how can we encourage it? In this article I will attempt
to address these questions and more.

Delivering great product takes great teams but putting them together is
challenging. It is easy enough to stick a group of people in a room, give them a
list of tasks and ask them to complete them by a date. What is not guaranteed is
that any of the tasks will be completed when you expect.

## Start with a definition

Before we build a team we must first come up with a definition of a team. What
does a team mean to us? Who is it comprised of? What is it's purpose?

Let us just say a team is a group of people brought together for a purpose. It
will be made up of everyone who are required to realise it's purpose. In the
world of software development, teams are brought together to implement new
functionality, to bring improvements to systems and to solve issues.

The purpose of a team is also important. We can define a team's purpose or goal
as something that will be reached within one short iteration. Perhaps two weeks
at most. A team must begin with a goal and end with the delivery of the goal.

We can take this definition a bit further and apply it to building a team.
To build a great team is to engage a group of people around a particular goal
with enough energy to see it through to a conclusion.

## Properties of an agile team

Great agile teams deliver often. They get something out in the wild and respond
to feedback. Agile teams win trust from their successes and recovery from
failure. In order to build a unit that can win trust you must first build a
framework around a team that enables them.

When pulling together teams you are shaping your delivery process. There are
three properties I believe your process should embody:

 - Autonomy
 - Craft
 - Focus

When your process embodies and enshrines these properties you will have yourself
a good foundation on which to deliver.

## Autonomy

Working towards a common goal requires buy in from a team. They need to be
interested enough in working together in order to achieve the desired outcome.
The feeling of responsibility and ownership will strengthen their resolve to
achieve a goal. They must be allowed to make mistakes so that they can learn
from the pain of failure. A team must have permission to solve a problem how
they see fit. This is autonomy.

### Thriving on responsibility

When given to a team, autonomy is powerful in that the responsibility for
delivery is felt strongly. When they can make their own decisions there are
fewer reasons to not deliver, fewer blockers.

A software engineering team who can push their code directly to production as
often as they like have no process to hide behind. When you can QA yourself
there is no need to wait for someone else to check your work and you can
therefore move faster. When such barriers are lifted a team will know that the
buck stops with them and more often than not teams thrive with such
responsibility.

### Realisation of responsibility

Transitioning a team into a self organising structure can take a little bit of
time. Sometimes we find a team isn't used to such responsibility. They can
sometimes be unaware of it and sometimes even actively try to avoid it.

We have noticed that process can be introduced by team members who are not ready
to move so fast. We find some teams feature creep or change their goal
completely mid-iteration. Such sabotage comes from an engrained sense that work is
continuous, without a start or a finish.

Introducing ceremony around delivery cycles such as a showcase during and at the
end of the iteration can help. Getting the team to present their work when they
reach a milestone can really help a team self organise. The key is to not allow
showcase dates to change so that a team has to explain to stakeholders when they
haven't achieved their goal. This drives them to make changes to avoid the
embarrassment in future.

### Ask forgiveness, not permission

When we drop a team into a business where teams do not have as much autonomy as
we are used to frustration can soon ensue. Autonomous engineers quickly get
frustrated quickly at being unable to solve problems themselves.

> A team must have permission to carry out their purpose

When deployments of certain applications must be performed by a particular
someone, especially someone outside the team, then those used to being able to
deploy anything will soon be saddened. Same goes for not having permission to
create new trello boards and github repos. Teams must be empowered to do all of
the above. A team must have permission to carry out their purpose.

### Making mistakes

When teams are autonomous they will make mistakes. They'll often make more
mistakes but they'll also be making them faster. Making mistakes early means
the team can learn and adapt. Autonomous teams may be fast to break things but
also fast to fix them.

We have heard horror stories of a fast moving autonomous team having a 2 month
deploy freeze on their project after breaking stuff that they could have fixed
in 5 minutes. This is not the way to deal with failure, a team must have the
autonomy to fail and correct such failure.

### Empower your teams

A team becomes empowered when they can self organise and complete their purpose
with minimal blockers from the outside world. They should be allowed the chance
to show off their agility when making mistakes. Their autonomy will strengthen
their resolve when they feel the responsibility and power to deliver is with
themselves.

## Craft

A culture of craftship is important to an agile team. A team who are excited
by their ability to solve a problem the way they want will enjoy working towards
a common goal. Practices such as Test Driven Development and Continuous Delivery
are both indicators of excellence and also improve the ability to achieve a
goal. A team who are excited to discuss their work will be having the
conversations necessary to solve a problem as a team.

### Love for the job

When an individual loves their craft they will be excited to solve problems.
A group of excited people solving problems have a collective energy that can be
felt when you walk into the room they occupy.

A good sign of a team that love their job include seeing two people sitting at
one computer discussing a problem. Another perhaps when they're standing by a
story board discussing their next task.

Positive energy goes a long way and can keep a team interested and undistracted
for longer.

### Best practice

A software team practicing Test Driven Development and Continuous Delivery will
be exposed to industry best practices enough to know about these methodologies
and more.

Expertise within a team will accelerate the speed at which problems can be
solved.  If they've been practicing them for a while you may well have yourself
an expert team. It can also help up skill other members although there will
always be a cost to productivity when expert members divert attention to
assisting others.

### Thrill of craftship

The buzz in the air when you walk into a team's room is a good sign of healthy
communication. Those excited and caring of their craft will be happy to discuss
their techniques with colleagues who may in turn offer up even better solutions.

Walking into a room and everyone has their headphones on it's a sign you
may have a problem. You want the communication to be flowing.

Of course communication and craftship aren't the same thing but good
communication does come with a team who are good at their craft.

### Cultivate your craft

Bringing together a group of people who care for their work is key to achieving
goals. The positive energy from a teams excitement is the fuel to going the extra
mile, to achieving goals more efficiently. With care of craft comes best
practices that will help ensure the quality of work delivered. Healthy
communication means problems will be collaboratively with the combined expertise
of a team rather than by siloed individuals. Craftship is a must for solving
problems.

## Focus

Bringing a team together to solve a problem is hard. The bigger the goal the
more likely you are not to succeed so you best keep those goals small. A team
built of members who aren't always allocated to that team is sometimes a
necessity but is to be avoided whenever possible as context switching isn't fun.
Same goes to a team working towards multiple goals, context switching isn't fun
so don't do it.

### Defining a goal

Carefully defining a team's goal is crucial to their success. We find the
smaller the goal the more likely we can accurately predict a completion time.

Smaller goals are easier to put live since a goal affecting a smaller
surface area means there is less risk associated with change.

Undiscovered complexity is also less likely to disrupt an iteration. The smaller
the problem we are solving the less likely it will explode into a massive piece
of work that affects our deadlines.

### 100% commitment

A common problem we've found working with clients is that team members are often
not committed 100% to a particular team.

Often team members will be pulled from one team to another to help out with a problem. Sometimes team members are actually committed to both teams. We try and
stop this as soon as we can as it completely breaks focus.

We try and ensure goals are broken down enough so that we can finish one goal
before switching focus onto another. This means a team member will be at most
busy for a couple of days before being able to move to another team to provide
their expertise.

### Ronin engineers

A similar problem is that of the ronin engineer, or more simply a teamless
engineer. They are usually in charge of a piece of technology rather than
working within a team.

Service desk type system operations is a variant of the ronin. This is where you
have a team dedicated to a technology rather than a team such as infrastructure
or deployments. We try and move these engineers into a single team. We also try
and knowledge share their expertise as soon as possible so they do not become a
blocker for other teams when they are busy.

### Solve one goal at a time

Teams should have a single goal when they are brought together. A single goal
means they can focus on solving that problem properly before starting another
one.

We often setup trello boards per goal and only let a team work from that
board. If other work emerges we ask teams to make note of it and bring it up
in the showcase of their current goal.

### When goals change

Sometimes mid-iteration a goal will change based on some learnings. You may find
that another change must be made before your original goal can be achieved. At
this point you cancel the iteration and pull stakeholders together to share
learnings.

Goals may sometimes actually be two goals in disguise. It is not always obvious
until you start work. This realisation is again a good time to stop and pull
together stakeholders.

After debriefing everyone you can redefine the goal you want the team to solve
first. Remember, solve one goal at a time.

### Focus is paramount

Focus within a team is paramount to getting a problem solved. Just like breaking
big stories down in traditional scrum, goals should be broken down into their
smallest possible incarnation. Team members should be allocated to a single
team and that team to a single goal.

## Team work should be fun

The framework on top of which you form teams should make team work fun.
Autonomy, craft and focus are all properties that can help you achieve this.

A team needs to know they have the power and responsibility to solve a
challenge. A team needs to be excited about their solutions, conversating and
learning from each other. A team needs small focussed goals in order to deliver
on time.

I'm interest to hear what your experience is with building agile teams. Does
the above ring true for you? What properties do you foster when building teams?
