# The Digital Classroom

From keeping in touch with friends, to hailing a cab, and even allowing us to
control the temperature of our houses from our phones, Technology has become
increasingly pervasive, changing the way we do things and how we interact with
one another. Contrary to what some would think, Education was not left out of
this revolution. In recent years, an incredible number of digital tools and
platforms have seen the light of day which try to improve how people learn, how
teachers share their knowledge and allowing pedagogical resource provider to
reach an ever increasing number of people. But in Education, things cannot
change as rapidly as in other sectors because the cost of doing something wrong
has long lasting consequences. Pedagogical practices have been refined over the
years and introducing changes requires a lot of thought.

In this post, we would like to first look at some areas where Technology could
actually add value to existing practices, and how it can be used to solve
particular pain points. Then we will move on to sometimes unforeseen challenges
schools and universities face when going digital. Finally we will provide some
thoughts on how to ensure the digital transition is as smooth and as successful
as possible.

## Benefits

Here are some areas where digital solutions could make sense and things they
enable.

### Online First

Probably one of the biggest challenges any teacher faces with a classroom is to
ensure all students acquire the knowledge they are supposed to. But each person
learns in a different way and at a different pace. Using digital tools can allow
teachers to provide different teaching materials, such as text lessons, videos,
exercises or even pedagogical games, that cater best to individual student's
needs. Making those resources available online, opens up a world of
possibilities such as [Flipped
Classrooms](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flipped_classroom),
[Differentiation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Differentiated_instruction), or
[Gamification](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gamification).

### Progress Reporting

One important aspect of a student academical success is the ability to 
self-assess, as this gives the student more ownership over its learning process.
For parents, it is also important to make sense of their children's report in
order for them to give better support. As such, crafting good user interfaces,
with common components such as dashboards, that are adapted to both student's
age and subject matter help making this information more understandable.

For teachers, new developments in Docimology may impact the way they used to
work and assess their students. A digital solution that helps them reuse their
existing teaching material will make adoption of new assessment practices easier
and more widespread across faculty members.


### Communication

Improving communication between teachers, parents and students is an ever going
effort and digital tools have become the _de facto_ solution for most communication
channels. From email, to forums, or even using [Slack](https://slack.com/) in
the classroom, there is a plethora of tools that try to make communication more
efficient or have information shared be more accessible. For institutions, this
can raise important issues such as privacy, moderation or centralizing
communication channels. More often than not, existing products don't fulfil
every requirements and bespoke solutions could make more sense rather than just
falling back to email.

## Challenges

After having glanced over possible use cases for technological tools in 
Education, we now will start looking at some usual problems that arise when
it is time to actually implement those solutions. We will focus on three points,
Costs, Security, and Tool/Practices fit.

### Costs

Budgets in Education are notoriously constrained, that is why careful costs
consideration are important. One common example is a school deciding to buy 30
computers or tablets for a room so that every student can have their own online
access while in this classroom, only to find that 30 devices trying to watch the
same video on Youtube can put some serious load on your internet bandwidth.
Aside from the aforementioned not loading, it may impact the classroom next door
or anyone currently trying to get some work done online. The naive approach to
this issue is often to increase the bandwidth, which entails an unforeseen cost
increase for the institution. To add insult to injury, school usually find out
that increasing the bandwidth does not fix the actual issue and they just end up
with a pricier internet bill and expensive devices not being used any more.

This scenario could easily be avoided if the institution had a technology
partner, as this is a [known and solved
problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quality_of_service) in IT.

It is also good to keep in mind that financial costs are not the only ones
involved in modernizing the classroom. Other kinds of costs come into play such
as time, as educational institutions have hard deadlines, and people, that
either need to be trained or hired to ensure the success of the digital
transition.

### Privacy, Security and Resilience

One major source of concern for schools is the security aspect. Besides obvious
[authentication](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Authentication) (who can access)
and [authorization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Authorization) issues (what
can a user have access to), there are potential legal considerations to keep in
mind with regards to what information is being stored, where it is being stored,
and how it is encrypted. This is where off the shelf solutions usually fall
short.

Those considerations also lead to some more thoughts around the defence
mechanisms against inside and outside threats. As the information stored is
highly sensitive, both on premise and on the cloud solutions have to mitigate
external threats, but also prevent students from changing their own grades for
example (yes this happens).

One last note, maintenance, backup and overall availability are key in making
sure services are always up when needed and that catastrophic scenarios can be
recovered from.

### Tool/Practices Fit

When it comes to adoption of new tools and technology, a few items can play a
part, but the most important is that the proposed tool actually solves a use
case for their users. One one hand, tools that are pushed from top to bottom
usually face a decent amount of rejection from end users. On the other hand,
trying to reach a consensus on what available tools to use can be hard. That is
where custom built solutions usually shine, as a competent technological partner
can help design a system for school users and integrate it tools users already
love and use, bringing in the best of both worlds.

Another area where custom built solutions have an advantage over off the shelf
ones is that often schools have students of different age ranges. Having 6 year
old using something like Excel or young adults using a Fisher Price like user
interface is ... less than ideal. Don't force a digital solution to your users
if it does not meet your actual requirements.


## Making It Happen

Considering the challenges that may arise, we'd recommend not trying to do it on
your own, but instead to search for a partner to help you modernize your
institution.

### Set Up

Before even starting your search for a digital solution provider, make sure you
and your team are in a good position to start the actual transition:

- Identify stake holders inside your institution and figure out where you all
  want to move towards to.
- Decide on where your initial efforts should focus. The idea is to start small,
  then reiterate on the solution to reach your end goal.
- If it doesn't exist yet, create a technical referent role in your institution.
  This role should preferably be filled by a faculty member as that person will
  be the main liaison between your external partner and your institution.

### Partner

As far as potential partner go, here are a few of the things you should look out
for:

- As obvious as this may sound, don't hire your nephew to create your website.
  Go for a company with experience in building tailored solutions for
  businesses. Keep in mind that paying for expertise will prevent you from
  spending more due to unforeseen problems.
- To protect you from high costs up front and to make sure you end up with the
  best fit for your institution, prefer potential partner who practice
[Continuous Delivery](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Continuous_delivery)
- Try to find a partner with previous experience dealing with your industry, as
  Education has a distinct set of requirement and practices.

### Implementation
- Start small
- Feedback
- Iterate often

## Conclusion

There are many valid use cases for introducing technological solutions to
existing classrooms, providing value for all parties involved, improving
existing workflows, and helping solve some new challenges. But deploying digital
solutions is something that needs to be done with care as to avoid unnecessary
strains on budget, to ensure private data is being kept securely, and to make
the digital transition the success story it should be. In order to achieve that,
selecting a partner with the right technical skill set, a proven deliverability
expertise, and some background in Education is key.

Here at MadeTech, we believe we check those boxes, and would be interested in
helping you complete your digital transformation. If that sounds like something
you would be interested in, [contact us](https://www.madetech.com/contact).
